text curation refactor updates (#1082)
NVIDIA-NeMo/Curator: docs/about/concepts/text/data-loading-concepts.md

---

(about-concepts-text-data-loading)=

# Data Loading Concepts

This guide covers the core concepts for loading and managing text data from local files in NVIDIA NeMo Curator.

## Pipeline-Based Data Loading

NeMo Curator uses a **pipeline-based architecture** for handling large-scale text data processing. Data flows through processing stages that transform tasks, enabling distributed processing of local files.

The system provides two primary readers for text data:

- **JsonlReader** - For JSON Lines format files (most common)
- **ParquetReader** - For columnar Parquet files (better performance for large datasets)

Both readers support optimization through:

- **Field selection** - Reading specified columns to reduce memory usage

> - **Partitioning control** - Using `block_size` or `files_per_partition` to optimize distributed processing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Partitioning control** - Using `block_size` or `files_per_partition` to optimize `DocumentBatch` sizes during processing
```
